4.5:Add Networking Info (#5656)
ArduPilot/ardupilot_wiki: common/source/docs/common-network.rst

.. _common-network:

===========================
ArduPilot Network Interface
===========================

As of firmware 4.5 and later, ArduPilot provides a network interface framework to allow local and wide-area network connections. Several later generation autopilots, like Pixhawk6X and CubePilot CubeRed, provide Ethernet physical layer interfaces, which allows ArduPilot to connect to vehicle peripherals, data servers, and even the wide area network via IP using transport layer UDP or TCP protocols.

> Currently, hooks into the normal serial manager within ArduPilot now allow serial devices not only to be connected to the autopilot via UART connections, but also via network connections. These are currently limited to using Ethernet physical layer.

Reviewer: change "now allow serial devices" to "now allow serial protocols"

> In addition, LUA Scripting bindings allow the autopilot to run network server type applications via LUA scripts. A web server LUA example that allows faster log downloads, as well as vehicle/system status data to be presented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, LUA Scripting bindings allow the autopilot to run network server type applications via LUA scripts. A web server LUA example is available as an applet that allows faster log downloads, as well as vehicle/system status data to be presented.
```

> ArduPilot has AP_Periph firmware that allows the easy development of network peripheral devices using the peripheral's Serial or DroneCAN interfaces to the peripheral device and an easily set up means to pass those devices' data to the autopilot over the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For peripherals with a network interface ArduPilot has AP_Periph firmware that allows the easy development of network peripheral devices using the peripheral's Serial or DroneCAN interfaces to the peripheral device and an easily set up means to pass those devices' data to the autopilot over the network.
```

ArduPilot Network Framework Overview
====================================

> ArduPilot provides a NET manager facility that provides the IP protocol engine, as well as UDP and TCP transport layer engines. Four configurable IP ports are available, and each one can be a UDP or TCP, Client or Server. Data flow to/from these ports can either be used by the autopilot as if the data streams were those of a:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ArduPilot provides a NET manager facility that provides the IP protocol engine, as well as UDP and TCP transport layer engines. Four configurable IP ports are available, and each one can be a UDP or TCP, Client or Server. Data flow to/from these ports can be used by the autopilot as if the data streams were those of a:
```

> - A serial device supported by ArduPilot (ie. Rangefinder, MAVLink stream, Gimbal, serial ESC, etc.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A serial device supported by ArduPilot (ie. Rangefinder, Gimbal, serial ESC, etc.)
```

> - A DroneCAN device supported by ArduPilot that utilizes a serial data stream

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A MAVLink connection to another vehicle or GCS
```

In addition, LUA Scripting running on an autopilot can access these data ports.

.. image:: ../../../images/Net_framework.jpg

Configuration
=============
Global ArduPilot Configuration
------------------------------

- :ref:`NET_ENABLED<NET_ENABLED>` must be set to "1" and parameters refreshed in order to see the following:

- :ref:`NET_MACADDR0<NET_MACADDR0>`
- :ref:`NET_MACADDR1<NET_MACADDR1>`
- :ref:`NET_MACADDR2<NET_MACADDR2>`
- :ref:`NET_MACADDR3<NET_MACADDR3>`
- :ref:`NET_MACADDR4<NET_MACADDR4>`
- :ref:`NET_MACADDR5<NET_MACADDR5>`

This is the global 6 byte MAC address. The default is automatically generated from the autopilot's CPU unique id, but can be changed if desired.

- :ref:`NET_IPADDR0<NET_IPADDR0>`
- :ref:`NET_IPADDR1<NET_IPADDR1>`
- :ref:`NET_IPADDR2<NET_IPADDR2>`

> - :ref:`NET_IPADDR2<NET_IPADDR2>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :ref:`NET_IPADDR2<NET_IPADDR3>`
```

- :ref:`NET_GWADDR1<NET_GWADDR1>`
- :ref:`NET_GWADDR2<NET_GWADDR2>`
- :ref:`NET_GWADDR3<NET_GWADDR3>`

This is the gateway's IP address out of the local sub-net defined by the :ref:`NET_NETMASK<NET_NETMASK>` mask. Any destination IPs that are outside the masked subnet range will be sent to the gateway's MAC address with the final destinations IP address.

ArduPilot Port Configuration
----------------------------

Parameters for each of the four logical ports per network physical interface (example shown only for Port 1):

- :ref:`NET_P1_TYPE<NET_P1_TYPE>`: Type can be disabled (0), UDP Client (1), UDP Server (2), TCP Client (3), or TCP Server(4). For the two client types a valid destination IP address must be set. For the two server types either 0.0.0.0 or the autopilot's local IP address can be used. The UDP client type will use broadcast if the IP is set to 255.255.255.255 and will use UDP multicast if the IP is in the multicast address range.
- :ref:`NET_P1_IP0<NET_P1_IP0>`, :ref:`NET_P1_IP1<NET_P1_IP1>`, :ref:`NET_P1_IP2<NET_P1_IP2>`, :ref:`NET_P1_IP3<NET_P1_IP3>`:IP address for outgoing packets from Clients. Can be 0.0.0.0 or the autopilot's IP address for Servers.

> - :ref:`NET_P1_PORT<NET_P1_PORT>`: This is the IP port number. This is used only for Client outgoing packets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :ref:`NET_P1_PORT<NET_P1_PORT>`: This is the TCP or UDP port number. This is used only for Client outgoing packets.
```

- :ref:`NET_P1_PROTOCOL<NET_P1_PROTOCOL>`: This registers this port with the ArduPilot Serial Manager as having a device attached which uses the specified protocol. This allows ArduPilot to use the data as if it had come from a UART attached device or connection.

The figure below shows a typical single device setup for an Ethernet gimbal.

.. image:: ../../../images/NET_Periph.png

The figure below shows a typical vehicle system with multiple peripherals and an optional ground-based connection to a factory network for data retrieval and vehicle setup.

.. image:: ../../../images/Net_Vehicle.png

Server or Client?
-----------------

> For peripheral devices the choice is usually dictated by the manufacturer. If it is a TCP server then ArduPilot's port should be a TCP Client. If its a UDP Client, then ArduPilot would be a UDP Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The choice of client or server is determined by the capabilities of the device being connected to. If it is a TCP server then ArduPilot's port should be a TCP Client. If its a UDP Client, then ArduPilot would be a UDP Server.
```

In general if a device is a controllable object to the autopilot, it would be a server, always listening for commands (ESC, Gimbal,etc.). If a conntinous data stream (like an airspeed sensor), it would probably be a client, able to send data without inquiry.

Scripting
=========

TBD...with webserver example setup and screenshots

> AP_Periph

Reviewer: I suggest dropping the AP_Periph section for now, it is not ready

=========

ArduPilot's :ref:`AP_Periph firmware <ap-peripheral-landing-page>` provides an easy means to create Ethernet based peripherals. The peripheral firmware can directly passthrough data from any of its Serial or DroneCAN ports having a serial based peripheral to one of its network ports.

Up to 9 network ports can be configured with up to 9 passthrough crosspoints between any two endpoints (Serial ports, DroneCAN buses, and Network Ports).

.. image:: ../../../images/Net_AP_Periph.png

Cable Adapters, Cabling, and Wiring
===================================

> Most Ethernet devices are interconnected with CAT5 cables with RJ-45 connectors. These connectors are obviously too bulky for use on an autopilot or vehicle Ethernet switches. Instead 4 or 5 pin JST-GH or Picoblade connectors are used. Therefore, cable adapters such as the `BotBox adapter <https://botblox.io/switchblox-cable-adapter-for-ardupilot/>`__ , or other RJ45 breakout boards, need to be used if connecting from them to classic RJ45 interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most Ethernet devices are interconnected with CAT5 (or higher) cables with RJ-45 connectors. These connectors are obviously too bulky for use on an autopilot or vehicle Ethernet switches. Instead 4 or 5 pin JST-GH or Picoblade connectors are used. Therefore, cable adapters such as the `BotBox adapter <https://botblox.io/switchblox-cable-adapter-for-ardupilot/>`__ , or other RJ45 breakout boards, need to be used if connecting from them to classic RJ45 interfaces.
```

.. _common-network:

===========================
ArduPilot Network Interface
===========================

> As of firmware 4.5 and later, ArduPilot provides a network interface framework to allow local and wide-area network connections. Several later generation autopilots, like Pixhawk6X and CubePilot CubeRed, provide Ethernet physical layer interfaces, which allows ArduPilot to connect to vehicle peripherals, data servers, and even the wide area network via IP using transport layer UDP or TCP protocols.

Reviewer 2: Give PPP, perhaps add. "PPP networking can be used even on boards that don't have physical Ethernet interfaces, and supports all of the features of the network interface framework."

Author: see below

> Currently, hooks into the normal serial manager within ArduPilot now allow serial protocols not only to be connected to the autopilot via UART connections, but also via network connections. These are currently limited to using Ethernet physical layer.

Reviewer 2: Given PPP this "These are currently limited to using Ethernet physical layer." may no longer be true right?

Author: The wiki 4.5 for PP has not be done yet....I will be making changes appropriately then

Reviewer 2: Just wanted to capture it as I'm working through it, I'll forget if I try to remember it later.

Author: updated for PPP

For peripherals with a network interface ArduPilot has AP_Periph firmware that allows the easy development of network peripheral devices using the peripheral's Serial or DroneCAN interfaces to the peripheral device and an easily set up means to pass those devices' data to the autopilot over the network.

ArduPilot Network Framework Overview
====================================

ArduPilot provides a NET manager facility that provides the IP protocol engine, as well as UDP and TCP transport layer engines. Four configurable IP ports are available, and each one can be a UDP or TCP, Client or Server. Data flow to/from these ports can be used by the autopilot as if the data streams were those of a:

- A serial device supported by ArduPilot (ie. Rangefinder, Gimbal, serial ESC, etc.)
- A MAVLink connection to another vehicle or GCS

In addition, LUA Scripting running on an autopilot can access these data ports.

.. image:: ../../../images/Net_framework.jpg

Configuration
=============
Global ArduPilot Configuration
------------------------------

> - :ref:`NET_ENABLED<NET_ENABLED>` must be set to "1" and parameters refreshed in order to see the following:

Reviewer 2: Should this be "enableD"? It seems that (almost) all other _enable parameters omit the "D" and are _ENABLE. There is only one exception in plane that I can find - CHUTE_ENABLED.

Author: @tridge call

- :ref:`NET_MACADDR0<NET_MACADDR0>`
- :ref:`NET_MACADDR1<NET_MACADDR1>`
- :ref:`NET_MACADDR2<NET_MACADDR2>`
- :ref:`NET_MACADDR3<NET_MACADDR3>`
- :ref:`NET_MACADDR4<NET_MACADDR4>`
- :ref:`NET_MACADDR5<NET_MACADDR5>`

This is the global 6 byte MAC address. The default is automatically generated from the autopilot's CPU unique id, but can be changed if desired.

- :ref:`NET_IPADDR0<NET_IPADDR0>`
- :ref:`NET_IPADDR1<NET_IPADDR1>`
- :ref:`NET_IPADDR2<NET_IPADDR2>`
- :ref:`NET_IPADDR3<NET_IPADDR3>`

> This is the autopilot's 4 byte IP address. It defaults to ``192.168.13.14``. It can be dynamically assigned if the network has a DHCP server by enabling ArduPilot's DHCP client using the :ref:`NET_DHCP<NET_DHCP>` parameter, or manually set as desired.

Reviewer 2: It seems to be optional to set this. Tridge showed me how to setup ppp without setting NET_IPADDR[0123]. You might want to ask him how that's possible, so it can be explained here.

Author: see below

- :ref:`NET_NETMASK<NET_NETMASK>` is the number of leading bits set in the subnet mask. For example, if its set to 24, then the subnet mask is  255.255.255.0, which is the default.
- :ref:`NET_GWADDR0<NET_GWADDR0>`
- :ref:`NET_GWADDR1<NET_GWADDR1>`
- :ref:`NET_GWADDR2<NET_GWADDR2>`
- :ref:`NET_GWADDR3<NET_GWADDR3>`

> This is the gateway's IP address out of the local sub-net defined by the :ref:`NET_NETMASK<NET_NETMASK>` mask. Any destination IPs that are outside the masked subnet range will be sent to the gateway's MAC address with the final destinations IP address.

Reviewer 2: Ditto the above comment about NET_ADDR.

Author: none of those appear on an autopilot that does not have an ENET MAC integrated.....

Reviewer 2: Then perhaps that should be explained, as the first couple of sections _would_ apply even if there is no ethernet port - specifically when using ppp.

Reviewer 2: Oh - I just noticed that statement doesn't seem to be true. all the NET_IPADDR and NET_GWADDR parameters do appear on my Durandal by just turning on NET_ENABLE. It has no integrated ethernet.

Author: hummm I just built Cube Orange on master with PPP and it has no NET_ENABLE param

Author: okay needs special config to build...now I see the params....also, it takes more than a reboot to enable some things, you have to power cycle

Reviewer 2: Yes it's a bit confusing, some parameters changes 'work' with just a refresh, others require a reboot, I think I found there were a couple that won't even work on a soft reboot and require a hard/power off reboot.

ArduPilot Port Configuration
----------------------------

> Parameters for each of the four logical ports per network physical interface (example shown only for Port 1):

Reviewer 2: Probably need to explain that the _TYPE fields work like an _ENABLE. the other fields for each port don't appear if the TYPE is (0) Disabled, and only appear if the type is changed to non-zero, written to the board and then parameters refreshed.

Author: will add

Reviewer 2: Oh this is one of those confusing ones (see above) - if you update _TYPE from 0 to some value, you only have to write/refresh, but once you have a set of NET_Px parameters visible, if you change the the NET_Px_PROTOCOL (or maybe any of the others? I know this one for sure), you have to reboot for it to take effect.

Author: updated

Running the Webserver Script Under SITL
---------------------------------------

- run SITL
- enable scripting (:ref:`SCR_ENABLE<SCR_ENABLE>` = 1), reboot SITL
- set :ref:`SCR_VM_I_COUNT<SCR_VM_I_COUNT>` = 1000000, reboot SITL
- connect local webrowser to "http://127.0.0.1:8080" (not types as shown to avoid https)

Resulting web page

.. image:: ../../../images/LUA_webserver.jpg

Connecting to Webserver via Network Attached Autopilot
------------------------------------------------------
In order to connect an autopilot running the webserver to the local network to allow other PCs to access the server:

- connect autopilot to the local network (directly or via Ethernet switch)
- make sure ``NET_IPADDR`` is an address within the local network range or use the network DHCP server to set it

> - connect local webrowser to "http://<NET_IPADDR>:8080" (not types as shown to avoid https)

Reviewer 2: I think you might mean "note: type as shown"

Author: thanks, will fix

.. _common-network:

===========================
ArduPilot Network Interface
===========================

> As of firmware 4.5 and later, ArduPilot provides a network interface framework to allow local and wide-area network connections. Several later generation autopilots, like Pixhawk6X and CubePilot CubeRed, provide Ethernet physical layer interfaces, which allows ArduPilot to connect to vehicle peripherals, data servers, and even the wide area network via IP using transport layer UDP or TCP protocols. In addition, custom builds for H7 based processors can be created with the `ArduPilot Custom Firmware Server <https://firmware.ardupilot.org/>`__ that includes PPP(Point-To-Point Protocol) allowing network connections over a serial port of the autopilot using PPP.

Reviewer 2: Because it's all one paragraph, this reads like PPP will only work on AP's with an ethernet adapter. Suggest breaking it out into 3 paragraphs, or make the last two sentences bullet points.
As of firmware 4.5 ...

- Several later generation autopilots ...
- In addition ...

Author: done

- :ref:`NET_GWADDR0<NET_GWADDR0>`
- :ref:`NET_GWADDR1<NET_GWADDR1>`
- :ref:`NET_GWADDR2<NET_GWADDR2>`
- :ref:`NET_GWADDR3<NET_GWADDR3>`

This is the gateway's IP address out of the local sub-net defined by the :ref:`NET_NETMASK<NET_NETMASK>` mask. Any destination IPs that are outside the masked subnet range will be sent to the gateway's MAC address with the final destinations IP address.

PPP Configuration
-----------------

This feature allows an H7 cpu-based autopilot to connect to networks via a Serial port using PPP. 

.. note:: this cannot be used with autopilots having a built-in Ethernet MAC. Only one network connection per autopilot is allowed currently. Also, only one serial port on the autopilot can be configured for PPP.

To enable this feature, it first must be present in the autopilot firmware. This can be done using the `Custom Firmware Build Server <https://firmware.ardupilot.org/>`__ or by building the code locally using the "--enable-ppp" waf configuration option (See :ref:`building-the-code`)

> To configure a serial port for PPP (Serial2 is used in this example):

Reviewer 2: You say Serial 2 but you use SERIAL5

Author: not enough coffee

Reviewer 2: BTW if you code the parameters like this you don't need to use an "example"
:ref:`SERIALx_PROTOCOL<SERIAL1_PROTOCOL>` - so on the page it will show "SERIALx_PROTOCOL" - but will click through to the parameter definition for SERIAL1.

Author: > BTW if you code the parameters like this you don't need to use an "example" :ref:`SERIALx_PROTOCOL<SERIAL1_PROTOCOL>` - so on the page it will show "SERIALx_PROTOCOL" - but will click through to the parameter definition for SERIAL1.

I am aware and I consciously avoid it due to possible implication that SERIAL1 is the only  param with that...I believe current style is better

- set :ref:`SERIAL5_PROTOCOL<SERIAL5_PROTOCOL>` = 48 (PPP)

> - set :ref:`SERIAL5_BAUD<SERIAL5_BAUD>` = 12500000 (12.5MBaud)

Reviewer 2: I've found that without flow control (I have tried on 2 different boards), the sweet spot seems to be 921,600 baud.

Author: added

.. note:: to get best throughput, the Serial port should have flow control (RTS/CTS) and it be enabled and used.

ArduPilot Port Configuration
----------------------------

These parameters apply for either Ethernet or PPP data link connections to the network.
Parameters for each of the four logical ports per network physical interface (example shown only for Port 1):

> - :ref:`NET_P1_TYPE<NET_P1_TYPE>`: Type can be disabled (0), UDP Client (1), UDP Server (2), TCP Client (3), or TCP Server(4). For the two client types a valid destination IP address must be set. For the two server types either 0.0.0.0 or the autopilot's local IP address can be used. The UDP client type will use broadcast if the IP is set to 255.255.255.255 and will use UDP multicast if the IP is in the multicast address range. A reboot is required to see the following parameters once the TYPE is set.

Reviewer 2: I don't think that's right. A refresh is all you need after setting _TYPE. A reboot is required after setting _PROTOCOL, _PORT and/or the IP address.

Running the Webserver Script Under SITL
---------------------------------------

- run SITL
- enable scripting (:ref:`SCR_ENABLE<SCR_ENABLE>` = 1), reboot SITL
- set :ref:`SCR_VM_I_COUNT<SCR_VM_I_COUNT>` = 1000000, reboot SITL
- connect local webrowser to "http://127.0.0.1:8080" (not types as shown to avoid https)

Resulting web page

.. image:: ../../../images/LUA_webserver.jpg

Connecting to Webserver via Network Attached Autopilot
------------------------------------------------------
In order to connect an autopilot running the webserver to the local network to allow other PCs to access the server:

- connect autopilot to the local network (directly or via Ethernet switch)
- make sure ``NET_IPADDR`` is an address within the local network range or use the network DHCP server to set it
- connect local webrowser to "http://<NET_IPADDR>:8080" (note: type exactly as shown... "https://" will not work)

> 

Reviewer 2: That's only one way to do it. I did this:
Another way to make the ArduPilot web server accessible to other PC's on a network or VPN, is to run a proxy on the a companion computer such as a Raspberry PI or Jetson Nano. This can be done by installing nginx and creating a site definition something like this
```
server {
	listen 80;
	server_name mycompanion;
	location / {
	proxy_pass http://<NET_IPADDR>:8080;
	}
}
```
where the proxy_pass url would be the address of the connected AP.

Author: a bit esoteric...many  other ways also....but do need to clarify line 130

Reviewer 2: I guess - it just seemed to imply that this is the _only_ way - I wanted to make it clearer that there is at least one other way, but as you point out, perhaps many others.
